all of us I'm sure have daydreamed of a
day where we just go into work and our
boss looks at us and he says you know
what today you can just do whatever you
feel like and many of us have been
frustrated or annoyed when we share a
new hobby that we found with a friend
and the first question is you know
what's the point or what's your goal
with all of this and if you've watched a
few videos on this channel then you've
probably questioned why educational
assessment well it aims to measure
intelligence often feels like it does
the opposite if you can relate to any of
those scenarios then I think you're
really going to enjoy this short
presentation an introduction to an
amazing book called why greatness cannot
be planned the myth of the objective
this book is written by two authors
Kenneth Stanley and John Layman and they
are a couple of computer scientists
researching artificial intelligence and
while they were doing their research
they uncovered a fatal flaw with the
objective-based thinking in the field of
artificial intelligence but they
realized that it didn't just exist
within the field of artificial
intelligence it actually extends much
other than that into pretty much every
area of Modern Life
I've shared this book with a lot of my
close friends and they all unanimously
agree that this is the kind of book that
is like a must read it will change your
perspective on goals and objectives
which are generally seen as you know
overwhelmingly positive and they will
make you rethink the way that you're
living your life so I'm very glad to be
able to just share a couple of the ideas
and arguments that Kenneth and Joel make
in this book in this very short
presentation in the hope that you will
then go on to read the full book and
check out the presentations that Kenneth
has done on YouTube
so it goes without saying that in this
book Kenneth and Joel are going to be
very critical of objectives and metrics
and how they impact our understanding of
progress
so one of the points that the book
really makes you reflect on is how
objectives have crept into pretty much
every aspect of Our Lives to the point
that we believe as Kenneth says that any
worthy social accomplishment is best
achieved by first setting it as an
objective and then pursuing it together
with conviction
it's clear to us the objectives so at
the Forefront of certain fields for
example economics has long-run GDP
growth targets investment growth targets
and so on in education of course we have
grades and the goal is to increase
student scores on assessments each year
and in science in order to receive
funding scientists need to be able to
say what their objective is once they
receive this funding you know what's
their goal what are they planning to do
with the money that they receive
but Kenneth and Joel point out that
objectives also lurk in the background
of our daily lives for example in our
Hobbies we often try to set goals and
deadlines expectations and targets for
ourselves to achieve a certain Thing by
a certain time
even in the most subjective areas of Our
Lives for example finding a partner
dating websites will often ask you you
know what's your type what are you
looking for
now at this point you might actually be
thinking that that doesn't actually all
sound that bad after all aren't
objective is supposed to give us
something to strive for motivate us to
help us to achieve great things but
while the common view of objectives is
that they create potential for
achievement
Kenneth and Joel argue literally the
opposite they say that by setting
objectives you're actually massively
constraining your ability to achieve
great things and as for why that is
we'll explore it later in the
presentation
the second thing that Kenneth and Joe
were very critical of in their book is
the use of metrics
so metrics in our society are basically
seen as the compass that we use to
direct us towards the goals that we've
set for example in economics we have GDP
the most popular indicator of economic
growth and we expect that as GDP
increases we're basically getting closer
and closer towards our goal and if it
ever decreases that must mean we're
moving further away from it
likewise in the education system we have
gpas and grades
we expect that as students increase
their gpas or grades they're basically
increasing their intelligence and if
your GPA ever declines that must be a
bad sign
of course there are many other examples
of these metrics that we use in our
daily lives since they've become so
filled with them benchmarks milestones
kpis at work the list goes on and on but
just like objectives metrics have this
tendency to creep into your daily life
in areas where you might not even expect
them
and despite reading this book over a
year ago discussing it with many
different people and thinking about the
ideas a lot I'm certainly not immune so
I can give you a personal example here
from my guitar practice data which I
track pretty religiously the idea was
that by tracking my guitar practice data
I could gradually increase it over time
and the expectation was that this would
lead to me achieving certain goals like
for example being able to record an
album or come up with a great
composition a great piece of music but
will this book really makes you question
is whether tracking these metrics and
expecting them to lead towards your goal
is really the right approach or whether
we're actually just being deceived by
metrics
finally objectives and metrics combine
to influence how we see progress as a
whole Kenneth and Joe argued that since
we use objectives and metrics in so many
different areas of Our Lives now we've
basically come to believe that progress
itself depends on assetting objectives
and using metrics to track our progress
towards them
we've essentially decided as society
that objectives and measurable metrics
are the only route to achievement
so let's take a closer look at the
arguments Kenneth and job make against
objectives beginning with the argument
that goals kill rather than create
opportunity
so to illustrate this point I've created
a simple interactive visualization
so if you imagine yourself as this B
over here and you imagine yourself
flying through the environment looking
for flowers with nectar on them then
let's assume that the B follows the
advice of Human Society at large and
decides to set an objective a specific
flower it wants to fly to Let's imagine
it sets it to this one over here then it
also decides to use the distance towards
that flower as its metric as its
distance decreases it knows it's going
in the right direction and if the
distance towards that flower increases
then it knows it's going in the wrong
direction
so let's see what that would look like
the b word go along here
go up here
I would realize that going down here is
the wrong way sort of go back down here
around here
do do
and gradually makes its way
towards the objective
so clearly the bee's decision to use an
objective here has a major drawback if
we reach out the flight path of a b then
as it flies down here you can see that
had it decided to fly into this flower
and explore this region of the
environment then it would have found a
pretty dense uh region of interesting
flowers to land on and do whatever bees
do on flowers
but because the metric the beer is using
is telling it that it's going in the
wrong direction uh it never gets the
opportunity to explore this region of
the environment of course this analogy
is also applicable to human life if you
imagine yourself going through life
encountering interesting Stepping Stones
as Kenneth calls them towards
interesting things like a new career a
new hobby or even a scientific invention
or a new business if you've set a
specific objective that doesn't align
perfectly with the objectives that
you've set and the metrics that you're
using to tell that you're making
progress then you're going to abandon a
lot of interesting stepping stones that
could lead to great things but this
tendency of objectives to kill rather
than create opportunity is only the
first criticism that Kenneth and Joel
have of objectives the second one is
that our objectives and metrics can be
deceptive
so for this I've created another
interactive visualization which is a
maze and similar to the last one
the B has an objective of getting to the
Golden Nugget at the end of The Maze and
it's going to use a similar metric as it
used in the last visualization which is
the distance towards the Golden Nugget
so getting closer is considered better
and getting further away is considered
worse
but what's interesting about this maze
is that it's been set up in such a way
that the B immediately goes down this
path because it sees that it's getting
closer towards the goal but it runs
itself into a dead end
although the metric tells the bee that
it's making progress towards its goal
ultimately
following this path can never lead to it
reaching the Golden Nugget I think this
is one of the most important Concepts
that I took away from the book the
concept of deception in search which
basically means that even though your
metric is telling you that you're
getting closer towards your objective
even though your compass is telling you
that you're making progress towards your
goal you might actually just be running
yourself into a dead end like this B
over here
and I think it's also useful to see this
again in the previous visualization
so if I take you back to this one over
here
if you imagine that the B had said its
objective as getting to this flower over
here well you'll notice that this region
of the environment is completely
disconnected from any of the other paths
and for that reason when it starts
flying towards its objective even though
the compass that it's using the metric
that it's using to measure its progress
is telling it that it's making progress
towards its objective ultimately it's
impossible for the B to get to this
region of the map so depending on how
stubborn and persistent EB is and how
rigidly it sticks to its objective it
might end up being a life of
disappointment for this B
this concept of deception in search is
very common and you can see it in lots
of different areas
for example in economics when the GDP is
rising we feel great because we feel
like we're making progress towards a
better economy but it's not always the
case that an economy with a larger and
larger GDP will have people living
inside that economy who are having
better and better quality of life
and similarly when the GDP drops it's
not always such a bad thing sometimes
things have to get worse before they get
better sometimes the economy needs to go
into recession in order for there to be
a another wave of economic growth
likewise there are many public
intellectuals today who are very
concerned about the stagnation in
science and innovation but let's take a
look at the maze again to show why this
might be misguided
in order to get to the objective uh the
Golden Nugget but in this case would be
the next Cambrian explosion of
scientific innovation and technological
advancement
the bee needs to actually
suffer through a period of
it's metric telling it that it's getting
worse it's not making any progress needs
to go through a recession or a period of
stagnation
but by the time it gets to its objective
you realize that the bee was always
making progress towards its objective
it's just that the metric we were using
to track the progress was flawed so
assuming that Kenneth and Joel's
criticisms are correct how should we
change our lives in order to avoid the
deceptive metrics and objectives they
talk about in their book
Kenneth and Joel suggest that instead of
setting specific objectives instead we
should just collect Stepping Stones we
should just follow our interests and as
we run across things that seem
interesting or like they might contain
potential we should explore them and see
where the path leads instead of trying
to globally optimize our lives and
create a kind of curriculum for
ourselves a path that we must follow
until the end
although there's a downside which is
that you won't be able to say exactly
where you're trying to go the benefit is
that you won't be deceived by misleading
metrics and you won't have rigid
objectives leading you into dead ends
because you aren't actually trying to
get to somewhere specific you're
completely open to the possibilities the
stepping stones that will be presented
to you as you go through life
alright guys so I actually have a lot
more to say here but this is already
getting way too long for a summary so
I'm going to direct you to another video
I made around a year ago called there is
no good Learning Without pleasure where
I talk about something called the learn
Drive which is a concept that has a lot
of overlapping features with Kenneth
Stanley's concept of following the
interestingness gradient so there'll be
a link to that in the description so
thank you very much for watching and
I'll see you in the next video